welcome good afternoon what these lights
are horrible there's a lot of you here
today and I'm hoping that you have a
good time listening to listening to this
discussion the development tools are the
key development tools are what will make
Mac os10 successful will make your
application successful and will get us
all to the place that we want to be so
without further ado I want to introduce
Dave Payne the manager of the
development environment team thanks
Kathy all right it's great okay go ahead
and get started so what we're going to
take a look at today is the power of
project builder what you can do with it
how to do it so we'll go through a
number of things basically walking
through all the features of project
builder for creating editing and
navigating your projects take a look at
source code management from within
project builder configuring building and
debugging your targets for building
products and then so a lot of what we're
gonna do really is kind of walking
through a lot of the features make sure
that you know what exists maybe for
those of you who've used it it's some
review for some of that in this
particular session more than most or
more than hardly any in this conference
we are going to be talking a little bit
about future stuff we will discuss
what's new in project builder on the
developer tool CD that you received when
you registered or when you walked in
this morning and then as I mentioned
we'll talk about the future of project
builder to show sort of where we're
going with this so let's go ahead and
get started on what is project builder
so project builder is our integrated
development environment for Mac OS 10
from Apple with this we build all of Mac
OS 10 Carbon applications such as the
finder help viewer Sherlock are built
with project builder cocoa applications
our favorite project builder itself is
built with project builder
interface builder male the web objects
tools a lot of very heavy use of cocoa
within Apple there's a full Java to
environments that you can develop with
project builder and now on the May 2001
developer tools CD you also have the
ability to develop web objects five
applications so that's a lot of what
we've been doing for that you can
develop the UNIX tools so such as
daemons server processes I might want to
build tools that then you access from
graphical applications you can build
kernel extensions and device drivers so
really the whole spectrum of everything
that you can do with Mac OS 10 you can
do it from project builder but a lot of
times you don't create source from
scratch so there's a number of ways that
you can get source code into project
builder from other places and I'll talk
a little bit more about that later on
so project builder is really the
centerpiece of our development
environment strategy at Apple that's
your development hub we've been working
very heavily with a lot of other teams
with an apple to ensure the project
builder integrates well with those other
applications that others are working on
so if we're in for instance we interface
with the interface builder which is our
user interface construction tool for
cocoa and carbon applications you can
hear a lot about that in the next
session in this hall new again on the
May 2001 developer tools CD we integrate
with web objects builder an EO modeler
and the web objects team we'll be
showing that off in a lot of their
sessions throughout the course of the
week we also interact with the file
merge tool for graphical comparison of
files and with a lot of the performance
tools such as object alec and Malak
debug so we have integration with some
of these at this points we intend to
have further integration with others as
we move on in the future plus there's
some other things that were teams that
were working with that aren't yet
depicted on this
list so sometimes in the email lists and
other places people ask me so can I
really use project builder for my big
applications and the answer is
emphatically yes
we use project builder for over 250
projects that feed into Mac OS 10 within
Apple they are across the board from
applications to frameworks plug-ins for
all the you know screen savers and
system preference panels all of our
device drivers everything else goes
through project builder
so it's really in very heavy usage and
that's great for us we really try to
establish tight feedback loops with
those teams so that if they have a
problem we send people over we work with
them to ensure that we can solve those
problems and get developers past that
and that helps us deliver a better
product for all of you as well project
builder also really facilitates team
development it's pretty rare that you
have on a major application just one
person working on it so of course as you
would expect there's preferences for the
application but something kind of
innovative every developer on a project
has their own user settings for that
particular project that's stored within
the project files directory it's one of
our wrapped directories so each of you
has a separate file there which means
that with our integration with source
code control you can actually check the
files
and your settings files into CVS you can
delete the whole project off the disk
then and then six months later if you
have to come back and do some
maintenance then all of your user
settings are still there
so there's editor settings build
settings and debugger settings are all
stored on a per user basis and we'll
take a look at some of those as we go
through here so before I get too into
the meat of the product itself I'd like
to talk a little bit about the evolution
of project builder how where are we and
how did we get here
so we kicked this project off two years
ago in February of 1999 the first code
was written the first lines of code
there were two engineers on the product
at that point it's been my pleasure to
build the team over the past couple of
years transitioning people from our
older project builder wo older IDE on to
this and hiring new people internally
Steve near off mentioned this morning on
our tools overview that we're continuing
to heavily invest in tools now we've
actually had five new engineers join the
team since February of this year there's
other new employees out in the audience
hi welcome so I'm really looking forward
to you know the power of this team what
we can do moving forward in February of
2000 we started rolling it out with an
apple we had been using it before that
but now we start asking other people to
use it the March 2000 version that you
gots on the 2001 you got on the
developer tools CD and the original Mac
O's 10 is our version 1.0 it's a fully
usable product you can use it for all
your development but again we've got our
first update here in May 2001 the
primary addition there is the addition
of the web objects 5 supports but
there's a number of other
general-purpose fixes as well and we are
going to be doing new improvements new
releases on a regular basis for the
product so you should see things coming
out well for us ok so now let's go ahead
and start taking a look into the product
itself with creating editing and
navigating projects so to help me do
that I'd like to bring on stage Mike
Farris who now works for me as the
manager of the project builder team
itself so just I have the project
builder team the compiler team debugger
and performance tools and a QA and
integration team so Mike and I have been
working together for a while we're gonna
do a walk through the features of
project builder so the way we're gonna
do this if we can go ahead and have demo
on the other screen now for those of you
sitting in the far wings of the audience
you may want to move in
because we are gonna do slides on one
screen and demo and the other so let's
take a look the overall use of interface
first so we've got a project window open
here on the left side of the window are
the project structure panes so this is
where we keep information that's stored
on disk about the structure of your
product so the groups and files outline
is the first shown below that we've got
bookmarks for navigating through your
project then targets to represent your
build products and then breakpoints for
debugging on the right side of the
window we've got editor panes with a
navigation bar at the top of each editor
pane we'll talk a lot more about that at
the top of the window we've got a
toolbar that's now a configurable
toolbar just as in the finder and in
mail and many of you want to may want to
take advantage of that in your products
as well
this is using facilities provided to us
by cocoa we'll be providing additional
icons to add more facilities to let you
customize your toolbar as you'd like
over time and if you bring down the tool
panes here above the editor panes we've
got tools for project wide find for
build outputs for the console output and
input and output when you're running
your products and for the debugger so
how do we create a new project in
project builder so if we go up to the
file menu and bring up the new project
menu item and we can see that the new
product new project dialog comes up it's
got a lot of different project types
listed here so applications bundles
frameworks kernel extensions and i/o kit
drivers tools really everything that you
want to do on Mac os10 within each of
these we have different subsets of these
as well so you can do carbon
applications or
based Carbon applications you can do
cocoa applications or document based
cocoa apps effused in the NS document
model so sometimes we get the list the
questions on the list of Gia this is my
first experience with it I want to
create a C++ based tool how would I do
that
well maybe the C++ tool item is a good
choice but let's go ahead and create a
document based cocoa application and
that gives us a new project now a new
project that the template for that is
just a template and that provides us
with template source code files so a few
files in this case one class main source
file some resources again all templates
provides a build target and in general
for most of these things there's one
target that you would build from it you
can add any additional targets that you
want later in the case the web objects
projects sometimes they have more than
one target a client and a server I'm in
addition we provide references to the
frameworks and libraries that you'll
need to find the headers for your
frameworks for that project type and
link with so in this case we'll be
linking with the cocoa framework other
frameworks that you'll want to look at
would be the foundation and app kit
frameworks that make up cocoa so he get
direct access but again this is all a
template for a new project and you can
configure it as you will be on that I
mentioned that you can get source code
into project builder in other ways so if
we go up to the file menu again we've
got the import project menu item that
gives us the ability to import either
code warrior projects if you've saved
that out to XML or PB dot project files
from our previous version of project
builder what we now call project builder
wo4 which is now slated for web objects
5 - sorry web objects for dot 5.1
development with the old product the new
one handles web objects 5 when you
import this Korea
the group and files hierarchy and it
brings in any targets that you had in
your previous environment but you may
need to configure those targets a bit to
get them to build properly in addition
you can drag folders of existing source
code in from the finder so if you have
open source projects for example that
you'd like to work with in project
builder you can just drag that code in
so taking a closer look at our groups
and files outline here we can see that
this is just a user definable grouping
of files if you have experience with our
previous version of project builder this
is much more flexible now this is the
files here or completely independent of
the physical location on the disk it's
independent of any particular
restrictions of the build system so you
can reorient this however you want you
can move files around just by dragging
you can select groups or files and just
delete them if you wish you can select
multiple files and put them into a new
group through the project group menu
item hey you can go back and ungroup it
again so you can also add new files to
projects and we're add new frameworks so
link against new frameworks to add a new
file you can either go to the project
menu and use add file or add frameworks
but you can also drag in from the finder
so in this case we'll take an icon file
and drag it into our resources group
here in our project now when you add a
file it asks you do you want to copy
this item into the group or into your
project hierarchy so if it's somewhere
else on your system typically you'd
probably want to say yes it also asks
you what targets you want to add the
file to so in this case we only have one
target if we add more you can choose to
add it to multiple targets right at that
point okay
so among the other things that groups
and files outline gives you access to is
you can navigate down into your
frameworks if you'd like to take a look
at what headers do I have available
to me in this framework so this is one
of the mechanisms for getting to frame
or two headers there's a number of
others as well
so from this in this case we're
navigating down into the foundation
headers so we can see that those come up
in the editor whole list of those and
also then this is especially interesting
besides frameworks we've also got your
built products there so we can see down
here a products group that project
builder has created for us well that's
interesting that the food app is shown
in red here now that's because food app
doesn't yet exist on the disk because we
haven't built this project yet if I had
a file that was deleted from the disk or
doesn't exist that would show in red as
well and you might need to fix up the
reference to that but in this case we
can fix up the fact that the app doesn't
exist by building it so if you remember
this was a cocoa document based
application that we had created and now
we go off and build and the build tab
came up to show us the build output we
close that back up now we can go down
into the products group and navigates
down in and see the bundle contents here
so an application package on Mac OS 10
is a bundle you've heard a lot about
this you'll hear a lot more about it
so within here we can see the info dot P
list so we can click on that and see the
XML of that now a project builder I took
the information that you had supplied in
the project which in this case is
default and created that for us we've
got the Mac OS 10 directory that the
binary for Mac OS 10 is in here
there's the pkg info file that's
necessary for finder launch services to
find this application package as an
application and then there's the whole
resources group as well within this case
English resources so if you had your
project mocha lized into multiple
languages this is where you would see
the dot lproj is for your different
languages so we'll be enhancing this
facility over time to give you full
inspection of the built results of your
projects so you can envision
things like the size of the binary and
the groups and permissions and things
like that so let's take a look at some
of the capabilities of the editor so
we'll go back to the more complex sketch
project here that we've already had open
so sketch is one of the example projects
for Cocoa it's an NS document based
project that's out in developer examples
cocoa so we can select a file and we can
see that we've got full syntax coloring
here in the file we can do things like
splitting the window by going up here to
the split bar or split icon we can
resize each of the split panes we can
create more if we want we can close up
any particular split panes now a lot of
people are looking for more flexibility
in the environment so what if I don't
want to be constrained inside that
window well you can bring up files and
other windows by just going a double
clicking in the outline view and now it
comes up in a separate window you've got
all the same capabilities here where you
can split the editor pane each of the
entered panes has a navigation bar here
so you can flip between different files
show the same file different parts of
the same file or you can show different
files in the same editor pane some
people occasionally ask us is there a
facility for showing what line number
I'm currently on or going to a specific
line number so to go to a specific line
number let's bring up the go to line
menu item under the find menu and Mike
what line number should we go through
here oh I don't know about 20 line 20
sones good ok so we go directly to that
now also we find that if we keep that
window open and we move around between
the file the auto updates it's almost
barely visible on the screen up there so
clearly this is an opportunity for some
future improvements in the product here
now when you're editing there's a number
of different parameters you can set for
the text settings of the files so we can
do this by selecting a file and then go
up into the project menu doing show info
to bring up the file inspector so we can
do things like set the tab width set the
indent width you can set the end of line
characters so do you want to use the Mac
and the wine carriage return character
or do you want to use the UNIX end of
line character which is a line feed and
in the case of we've actually enhanced
the preprocessor the compiler and the
debugger to be able to handle either of
these properly but you may find that if
you're going to work with UNIX tools
with your files for example will run
Perl scripts across them to look for
word counts or something you might want
to switch to using UNIX end of line
characters you can also set the file
encodings so let's say that you wanted
to put kanji comments into your source
code files well we've got a whole set of
different file and coatings here if you
switch to utf-8 then you can represent
unicode characters in files that can
still be a process by our compiler tool
chain properly as well and go ahead and
put all the kanji comments in that you
want other capabilities from the
inspector here is that you can change
the reference style for how we're
accessing this file on the disk so you
might want to have the file be relative
to the group that contains it in the
groups and files outlined so you can say
that a group matches up to a specific
folder on the disk but you don't have to
you can also have a file be relative to
the project that contains it or you can
also say that it's an absolute path so
if you're going to be moving a project
around at all or moving it between
machines you'll probably want to use one
of the relative reference styles now
you've heard me talk about the fact that
your applications can be localized into
multiple languages with our bundle
facilities this is where you would do
this in project builders so we can
select a nib file here which is one of
the document files of interface builder
you can see in this case that we've got
an English localized variant of this as
opposed to it being completely global so
we can select that nib file and say that
well actually we'd like to add a
localized variance here so Mike
what should we put here let's try
Japanese okay let's try Japanese so we
can add a Japanese localized variants of
the file and now we've got two
localizations of this name file so one
more thing to note about this actually
you can also switch things to be global
resources again one more thing about the
groups and outline groups and files
outline that you should know is if you
go up to the very top of the groups and
files outline and select the topmost
item basically the route group in this
case sketch now the inspector changes to
show that we're inspecting the project
itself so I'll touch on this a bit more
later in the talk but this is where you
would set a build location for this
project specifically and I'll talk about
why you might want to do that and it's
also where you would select to commit
changes for SCM across the entire
project now let's talk about navigating
through the project in order to use some
of our more advanced navigation
facilities you first need to index your
project so currently with the shipping
versions of project builder we don't
index by default so if you wish to index
you go up to the project menu select
index project this goes through the
compiler - to index all the sea based
languages so C C++ and Objective C it
uses a separate parser for Java if you
do have any problems indexing in this
current version of project builder I
should go to the console look at that we
aren't currently invoking the build
system in quite the same way as when we
invoke to build your project that's
something we're going to be fixing in
the next release
as I mentioned the index is then used
for some of our more advanced navigation
mechanisms but let's talk about the
navigation as a whole first so for
moving around between file
in the navigation bar but above each
editor pane we have a pop up menu to
show the recently viewed files so you
can move between those there's also back
and forward buttons so you can move back
and forward as in a web browser kind of
a stack based there you also have easy
access to included files so we have
what's what we call the counterpart
button here in an icon on the right of
the navigation bar that lets you switch
between in this case a class file and
the header file for that particular
class file so we can move back and forth
there but if you've indexed your project
this is a little bit of a hidden feature
if you hold down the mouse button on the
icon the counterpart icon that shows all
the files that this file is including so
we can go to this from this source file
to one of its header files but then the
other interesting thing is now you can
walk up and down your include hierarchy
so you can see that this header file is
being included by two of the source code
files we can also go to on up the header
hierarchy and say well let me see gee
we're importing apke th let me see what
all it imports and from there that's
another mechanism to get to framework
headers so way of seeing the header file
dependencies in your project for
navigating within a file we have again
if the project is indexed we've got the
symbol pop up here so you can move
between different methods within this
file and you know if you move if you're
in the source code and you see a method
that you want to see say let me see the
the definition of this method so shared
print info here if I want to see the
definition of that we can do a command
double click on that and that takes this
to the declaration here if we had
multiple declarations of the same
function then it would put up a little
pop-up menu if there's a small number of
them if there's a lot of them it would
actually populate the find panel and pop
pop down with that and you can select
any lines
so I think that covers that so another
navigation mechanism is bookmarks these
are completely under your control each
user has their own set of bookmarks so
to set a bookmark in your project you
would select of line of code and then go
up to the add to bookmarks menu item in
the navigation menu so we can add a
couple of bookmarks now if we go over
here to the bookmarks tab we can see
that this is a way of navigating around
between different locations in our
project so we can actually rename those
by holding the option button and
clicking so you can if you're working on
a large project and you're working on
specific parts of it you can set up
bookmarks to easily allow you to jump to
that so again because this is on a per
user basis and multiple users will work
on different aspects of the project each
person gets their bookmarks saved
persistently with the project they can
be checked into CVS etc okay we also
have a project wide find/replace
capability here in the fine panel so
there's a lot of power built into this
we can control how far we want to search
so the search space here by going into
the find options so you could say I just
want to search in this project but I
want to search in all of my open
projects or I want to search in my
projects and my frameworks or just my
frameworks so there's a lot of control
there so you can set up individual find
sets however you want for that
so if we close that back up we can see
that we've also got different types of
searches that you can do so textual or
regular expression for just plain string
searches on if you've indexed your
project you can get to definition
searches as well and switch to finding
the definitions of methods so let's look
for in it with frame and we can see here
that based on the fine set that we had
selected
that we are seeing all the nits with
frame methods both from cocoa framework
headers themselves and from my project
so when we click on a method there on
the fine pane takes us to that
implementation or declaration in the
source code okay so that covers that for
our initial creating editing and
navigation navigating projects
walkthrough thanks Mike if we can go
back to slides on both screens please I
generally don't do these things where I
talk all the way through man bear with
me
so now let's take a look at some of the
source code navigation or source code
management facilities of project builder
so currently project builder interfaces
with one source code management system
on that CVS you may have heard of CVS or
you may not have it's the concurrent
versioning system this is an open source
source code management system that's
used for a lot of the open source
projects out there it's cross-platform
so it runs on a whole variety of
different systems a lot of different
UNIX platforms Windows NT there's
clients for the Macintosh it comes on
the developer tool CD so when you
install the developer tools you get CVS
we use it very extensively for Mac OS 10
with an apple which for us allows us to
test our our project builder interfaces
with this very well and if you're gonna
be working with the darwin sources at
all you may already be familiar with CVS
because you the darwin sources are kept
in CVS repositories and you can access
those out on the network and check out
the darwin sources directly so there are
some places you can get documentation
for using CVS in project builder we put
the manual on the system itself in
developer documentation commands CVS I
think will have URLs for this type of
thing
later up in the web also if you go to
project builders help menu there's
in the projects section there's a source
code management section there and it
covers a lot of what I'm going to talk
about so in order to use CVS within
project builder there's some things you
have to do to set up for this first
number one is you have to have a CVS
repository somewhere that you're going
to be storing a project in typically
there's one CVS repository for a whole
group of developers we have about three
of them within apples so the Darwin CVS
repository core OS has one and then
everybody else has one you can use
either local access to that an NFS
access looks local or you can use
client-server access to a remote CVS
repository it could even be on a
different type of machine but of course
you won it on Mac os10
for remote you can use piece server
authentication or with the new system
sorry I jumped the gun there you can now
use ssh authentication as well another
requirement is that your project already
has to be in CVS we'll be enhancing some
of these things in the future but for
now this is the way that you would use
this so from the command line in the
terminal window for example you would do
a CVS imports on your project to add it
to the repository and then you have to
check it back out of the repository into
a CVS working directory so on the
command line check it out some people on
the email lists ask gee a project
builder doesn't seem to have my SCM menu
enabled why is that a lot of times it's
because you don't have your project in a
working directory maybe you haven't yet
put it in the CVS those are some of the
precursors and one thing I forgot on
here is that you actually have to have
your CVS root environment variables set
up properly I believe and that's
documented as well once you've done this
then there's menu items for committing
changes on selected files or if you have
groups selected it commits all the
changes and files that are have been
modified in that group if you want to
commit everything in your project
including the project file itself you
would select that top-level group that I
showed in the groups and files outline
when you commit that makes the addition
and removal of files permanent
but before CVS knows about the addition
or removal of files you have to tell it
so there's an ad to repository menu item
or you can just delete files the SCM
status of files is shown in the groups
and outlines view
so there's modified you means that it's
updated out in the repository and you
need to update to it somebody else has
changed it question mark means it's not
yet in the repository a means that
you've added it and will be committed
later our means that it's been removed
so shows in grey there and check my time
here the C means there's been conflicts
so you can also compare different
revisions of the files through file
merge you can look at the change logs in
the file inspector to see all the
different revisions you can compare with
the base revision of a file you can
compare with the latest revision if
you're going to be checking in nib files
from interface builder Mac os10 and a
fair number of cases use what we call
wrapped files or packages even what we
do internally with an apple at this
point is used what's called CVS wrappers
in order to do this there's a
configuration file that we've supply and
developer tools CVS wrappers that you
would need to commit in to the top level
of your CVS repository and the CVS root
directory in client-server mode each
user needs access to that so you'd put
it in a dot CVS wrappers file in your
home directory this is all documented
actually in the last place we documented
it which was the release notes for
public beta which are actually still in
the product as well so I'd like to show
a quick demo of source code management
and the comparing of files here so
bringing Mike back up on stage so
let's go back into the sketch project
here and if we open up say our model
classes group we can see here that when
we open this up there's a file here
marked with a U
this means that typically we do check
for SEM status when we open a group for
the first time remember the you mantids
somebody outside and modify the file in
the repository so we'd really like to
see I don't really want to update to
that until I know what they've done to
it so let's go ahead and go into its SCM
menu item and do a compare with latest
revision now this will launch file merge
and we'd see in file merge here that
down to the lower left it shows that
there's been one difference in the file
that wow somebody added a new comment
well that looks pretty important so we
better update to that so now let's go
back to the SCM menu and we can do an
update to latest revision so bring in
what's in the repository if there were
conflicts in that update it would show
as a seed you could have used file merge
to do a merge of that as well
let's see modify a file yeah why don't
we modify a file that's a good idea so
let's go into draw documents and add an
NS log message here so in Cocoa this is
a wait this is a foundation call that
you can use to it's like printouts
essentially it comes out in the console
so we can add that when we save the file
we can see that it's now marked in their
groups and files outline as having been
modified and we can commit that by going
up to the SCM menu item commit changes
and enter a commit log personally I like
to commit things and sets so things that
had the specific change of one nature
commit them all together have the same
commit log and all so we can also
inspect the file and see all the
different revisions that we've had here
in the SCM tab the file inspector so we
can see that we've got essentially seven
revisions since the 1.1 so let's pick a
couple of those
and compare them so select a couple
arbitrary revisions hit compare and
again this launches file merge and shows
us the comparison here in file merge in
this case there's ten differences and
you can move between those okay so
that's it for our SCM demo that's file
merge for you now let's talk about
configuring building and debugging
targets so what is a target our targets
are really the face of the build system
in project builder the target just
defines a product to build a project
consists of one or more targets
presumably it probably wouldn't be that
interesting to have a project without
targets targets can depend on other
targets and we'll talk about about that
you can have build styles to allow
different variations of the same target
this is a really innovative capability
build phases control when you're
building a project a specific target how
does it get built I'm not going to go
into detail on this you can learn lots
about this in project builder in depth
tomorrow morning with Mike and the team
each user has an active build style and
an active target so I might be building
the working on the framework of the
project you might be working on the test
tool Lovins and he might be working in
the app portion when we help build it
might do different things for each of us
there's a bunch of standard types of
targets so we've talked a lot about Apps
bundles etc you can add as many new
targets to a project as you want by just
going to the new target menu item in the
project menu there's a couple of special
types of targets that we should
highlight a little bit
we have aggregate targets that don't
build anything themselves they just
Express dependencies on other targets so
this can be useful say let's say that I
have a set of command line tools like
the file commands on Mac OS 10
you can put all those in one project and
have an aggregate that builds them and
it is useful to have that as the first
target and I'll explain why in a couple
of minutes and you can also have
if you have normally project builder
controls the build system for you you
don't ever have to edit a make file or
anything else but there's a lot of power
to change that if you wish with the
build phases you can learn about
tomorrow
you can also have targets where you
control the build system or you're using
open source projects and you don't want
to change the build system that somebody
else set up you can just create a legacy
make file for that and you can specify
what build tool it is it might be make
but it could be any other command on the
system as well
so let's look a little bit more target
dependencies so you might have for
example if your application as well
factored you could have an application
and a test tool for it so for example
project builder itself that is a small
application that links with a few large
private frameworks that have all the
functionality and then we have tools
that link with those frameworks as well
so in this case we have the my framework
target represented in the diagram there
my application depends on my framework
my test tool depends on my framework you
could select either of though any of
those as your active target and it would
ensure that the framework gets built you
can also have an aggregate that depends
on all three here so the aggregate again
again the aggregate doesn't build
anything itself but it ensures that the
others get built
having the framework there is optional
from the aggregate because it'll get
built once regardless and you can
configure your target through the target
editor we're not going to go through
this in great depth but I'll talk about
different aspects of this so to set up
your build phases indicating what files
are in your targets and how to process
them do what source files do we compile
etc you would go through the files and
build phases aspect of the target editor
for build settings this is where you
control your compiler and linker options
things like your optimization settings
do you want to generate debug symbols or
not the install path of your project and
for advanced capabilities there is an
expert editor down there that lets you
set any build variable and values for
that
I can be useful in some circumstances
the info.plist that we showed previously
in the new project that we had created
there's a bundle editor here or bundle
settings that you can change the
different configuration settings for
applications for frameworks for bundles
for plugins so you can set for example
the identifier that the preference
system would use the type and signature
for applications you can set what the
icon is this is also where you would set
up what the document types your project
your application could handle so you can
set up as a reader or as an editor of
document types or if you just want to
put it out on the pasteboard you can set
it up with none if you don't actually
handle documents of that type then for
the debugging system there's a number of
things you can configure about how to
launch your executable here for either
running or debugging so let's say that
you have a plugin that you're working on
and that's all that's in your project is
a plug-in well we can't just launch that
and have it do anything interesting so
we have to specify an application as the
context that that plug-in would run in
this is where you would do that you can
hear a lot more about that in the
debugging session on Friday morning all
this ties into a very powerful build
system that does automatic dependency
analysis of your headers again I've
mentioned there's no make files to edit
we do leverage a lot of command-line
utilities underneath this so Jam is a
utility that's a lot like make that's
what project builder calls but very few
of you should ever need to look at Jam
files at all we talked to a lot of lower
level compiler tools so GCC for C based
languages res for dot our files Java C
or jikes for java compiling if you want
lots of access to the full power of UNIX
underneath you it's there for you either
in script build phases that you could
put in find more about that tomorrow or
the legacy make file targets that I
talked about where do build results go
so normally when you hit build and your
project go
to a build directory in that project but
you might want to specify a common build
directory for all of your projects and
this would allow project builder to
let's say that you had multiple
different projects where you've got an
application in one project and it
depends on three frameworks and you've
got each of those in different projects
if you set them all up to build into the
same place then without actually
installing that on your system project
builder can automatically configure the
dynamic loader to find all of that your
development versions of all of that when
you run so again find more details on
friday about that you would set that
either for all of your projects in your
building preferences panel or you might
have sets of projects that you want to
work on together so put this set over
here put this set over here when you
build that's what when inspecting the
project you can change on each projects
basis where that project builds to and
that's why you would do that the
compiler I'd mentioned that we're using
GCC so we use GCC 2.9 5.2 currently we
built all of Mac OS 10 with this so we
cranked a lot of code through this
compiler very heavily tested it supports
all of our C based languages and as you
may have already heard we are working on
resurrecting objective C++ to allow
cocoa applications to take advantage of
existing C++ libraries go to the
compiler technology session with John
Graziano and company on Thursday morning
to hear more about that you've also got
support for velocity engine in the
compiler C++ GCC is a fairly strict
about its ansi compliance on things
that's important to know if you're
coming in from other environments we've
done some performance improvements for
C++ code generation recently so we've
improved the exception handling and
coalescing of symbols so you can get
more information about that again from
the compiler session we are going to be
working with the latest versions of
you see as it advances so one thing that
you should definitely know is that the
C++ ABI the application binary interface
is changing between GCC tu-95 and GCC 3
so you don't want to have any shared
libraries that export C++ API put a C
wrapper around that there's a
precompiled header mechanism so we
supply precompiled headers for all of
our umbrella frameworks so cocoa carbon
application services core services so
when you go to imports cocoa slash cocoa
dot H we automatically find the fact
that there's a precompiled header there
next to that bring that in and that
tremendously spills up your build speeds
for c++ if you've got C++ code our
precompiled headers don't currently let
you store c++ syntax in the precompiled
header itself but we have now enhanced
this so that you can import and use
precompiled headers from C++ source
files so for example from C++
applications that might be using power
plants you can use the carbon age
precompiled header because that only has
c constructs in it project builder also
now has facilities to specify that
you've got an implicitly included header
that bring this into every file that we
compile so some environments call this a
prefix file and you can say that you
want that pre compiled as well so you
could set some defines and then import
carbonate into that and that would let
you use precompiled headers for a
customized version of carbon dot age now
I mentioned that project builder has
been factored into an application and
some frameworks well one of the tools
that also links with those frameworks is
called PBX build this allows you to do
automation of your builds so you can
have a UNIX cron job going nightly to
build all the sources of your project
Apple does this kind of thing with all
of Mac OS 10 we use the PBX build
command to build everything
so again this uses the same build
machinery as project builder itself by
default if you just run PBX build it
builds the first target in your list so
this is where having an aggregate here
is the first target might be useful to
you
if you want to make sure that all or
most of your project gets built and the
invocations of this look just like
invoking make so PDX build clean or PBX
build install so if you're going to set
things up to actually put them in to the
install places you want yeah we don't
currently have a way of doing this from
the IDE you would do this from the
command line some people ask us well why
does it build into slash temp well we
don't think it's a good thing to by
default build what could be a buggy
product directly into the install
directories on your system so we put it
in slash temp and the hierarchy there if
you want it installed directly when you
build set best reticules slash for
debugging we have an extensible
architecture that talks to gdb for
debugging all the C based languages talk
to the Java VM for debugging Java it's
full graphical source level debugging so
threads stack traces variables you can
have breakpoints that are saved on a per
user basis not only they're saved not
only between different runs of the
debugger but between different runs of
the IDE as a whole and again I talked
about how the project builder system
controls the dynamic loader to use
multiple projects at a time for
debugging them so development versions
of your frameworks and photos if you
aren't familiar with gdb it's a very
powerful open-source debugger that comes
with the Mac O's 10 development tools
handles all your C based languages you
can handle arbitrary expression
evaluation or invoke functions to get
the values of opaque data types such as
those from carbon you can set commands
and conditions on breakpoints and it's
got a very powerful macro capability
again the debugger session on Friday
morning you can learn lots more about
not only seed language to debugging from
project builder but Java as well and
about advanced features of gdb so I'd
like to show you some quick rounds of
building and debugging demo here so if
we can switch back to demo 6 abilties so
if we go back and bring up that sketch
project again and we had previously made
some changes to the project so let's go
ahead and build it and see what we've
got at this point so we hit build the
project was previously compiled so in
this case we do an incremental build
with just the SKT draw document we can
close up the build tab here because we
got a successful build now let's go
ahead and run so we can hit the little
monitor icon there to run the
application so it fires up brings it to
the foreground but we can see that in
the run tool pane here we got the
console output from the NS log message
that we had previously put in so great
but let's actually take a look at
debugging so let's quit out of this at
this point and let's say that we want to
debug the project now by default when
you build within project builder it
assumes that you're doing development so
it builds for debugging that's why some
of you look at and say why is my
executable so large that's because it's
got debugging symbols in it until we
build for deployment which find more
about that tomorrow so sorry I got ahead
of myself here ok so what I'd like to do
is I remember that there were some
issues there with the align left edges
methods of sketch so let's go and find
that method in the code
so we select the source for that and we
can put a breakpoint here on that by
clicking in the breakpoint well actually
yeah once you bring up the breakpoints
tab and just show that so now you can
see where the breakpoint is listed there
you can enable or disable it so let's go
ahead and go back into the application
and start debugging sketch comes back up
fires up to you to be on it launches the
project so now we can draw a few objects
here a couple of objects and do a select
all and then go and say align left edges
boom when we hit the breakpoint now we
can see a variety of things here are
shown in the bugger we can see that
we've got the stack back trace where we
stopped so you can see some stack frames
as shown in bold and some are in gray so
we have source code for those that are
shown in bold for the ones in gray there
in the frameworks we don't have source
code for that we've got two threads pop
up to show the different threads in your
application most Mac OS 10 applications
have more than one thread although keep
it minimal we've got variable inspection
here for all your different variable
types and the May 2001 tool CD you can
now set the values of variables when
you're debugging in Java and we have
worked on that for C as well if we start
stepping through the code here we can
see that variable starts turn red if
they've changed in the previous step so
we can go down and look at first bounds
and say okay here's a structure we can
see the contents of that structure when
we step over the line here that's going
to set first bounds it shows us that all
the values of the structure and changed
and if we step through a little bit and
for cocoa programming seeing the
description of an object is a very
important thing so if you want to do
that
what you have to do currently is bring
down the gdb console do a po4 print
object
of a particular object so in this case
Kurt graphic we can print the object
there will be providing better user
interface for this as well and again the
debugging session will go into more
detail in these things and then if we
were to step around the loop we'd see
continued increment the loop variables
so we can see that now I is on value two
for example okay so that's it for that
demo thanks Mike okay let's take a look
at what's on the May 2001 developer tool
CD that you just got in your packets I
front some of you probably had high
expectations that oh I hope my pet
feature is fixed well we've got full
support for web objects 5 development
here so you can still develop do all
your other development as well but the
primary theme again was web objects 5
for both project builder and interface
builder the web Bob's 5 developer
packages themselves are included on the
CD this time around we don't plan to do
that in the future but we'll give
exposure to web objects this time
there's also a limited version of the
runtime so it's a time limited
restricted version the runtimes that you
can test your web objects applications
with there's new system documentation
there's a some additional examples for
app kit like I think one for the use of
the NS toolbar and then some interface
builder examples as well then Honore
will probably talk about on the project
builder enhancements it's been localized
into Japanese general-purpose
enhancements you can now continue your
build after there's been an error in one
file so it can go off and continue to
try to compile all your other files
that's on the building preferences
there's a check syntax check mark in the
right portion of the navigation bar with
which you can do essentially a single
file compile check to make sure that
you're using the syntax correctly I
talked about the precompiled implicitly
included header files that's what you've
just in what you've just
there's build support for header dock
and some bug fixes as well I talked
about enhancements for Java so you can
now merge jar files automatically during
the build process on there were some a
couple of problems with building large
projects for Java hitting command line
length restrictions and things like that
those have been fixed now and build
performance improvements so a few vind
extra projects and you're getting there
for getting Java dependency analysis we
now are again throwing multiple files at
the compiler at the same time which
processes them more quickly
there's build support for Java wrappers
so there's a Java wrapper around
objective-c frameworks and I mentioned
that you can set values when you're
debugging Java so I had mentioned that
we were going to talk a little bit about
the future here we aren't doing that in
most places in this conference but we
wanted to let you know that we are hard
at work on the product working to
improve it both for your benefit and for
ours and let's take a look at some of
the things that we've got coming up so
we've gotten a fair amount of feedback
both from our external users and from
internal users that the symbol pop-ups
gee it's kind of slow to get them and
because I have to index my project and I
can't get a symbol popup on a file
that's not in my project if I just want
to bring up another file well we now
have for our next version a symbol
pop-up that's based on a simple scanner
with configuration property lists that's
much faster and handles any file that
you bring into the project so we are
listening to that type of feedback and
we've got a class browser for C++
objective-c and Java this is still based
on the indexing and we are changing the
indexing to actually generate the index
while you're building so because it's
already doing all that processing anyway
the the additional overhead on the build
process is very minimal but this will
make it more robust than it currently is
and we are also integrating the viewing
of developer documentation
directly into project builder itself so
yeah those of you who have used help
viewer to try to access developer
documentation you can sometimes see that
it might be nice to have faster more
flexible viewing there and then some
underlying support I talked about
objective C++ one other thing we're
working on is two-level namespace
supports in the linker and loader that
will let us add new api's to our
frameworks without breaking your
applications by conflicting with that so
you can find out more about that in the
compiler session so let's talk about the
class browser a little bit so cocoa is a
very big framework that's new to a lot
of people it's really not hard to learn
Objective C the language but learning
the frameworks is always the hard part
what can we do to help you there so
that's what a-class browser can help
with now for example where is this class
in the hierarchy
what's inherited etc let's see a demo so
if we can switch back to demo great so
going over to the other machine that's
got the special sneak preview version
here we can see that we've now got a
fifth tab here in the project structure
tabs on the left so a classes tab that
when we bring this over we can see that
it's got the NS object and NS proxy root
classes for cocoa so we can navigate
down in and see all the different
subclasses of NS object we can scroll
down through that and see for example NS
responder we might want to look to go
and what's in that and we can see that
NS view here so scrolling on down a
little bit further we see oh hey look
there's some classes highlighted and
bold here now that indicates that their
classes that are actually in your
project as opposed to in the frameworks
so we can click on a class and we can
see the members that are defined there
click on one of the members and we can
see the Declaration of that so that's
pretty cool now but let's say that I
knew the name of the class but I didn't
know where it was in the hierarchy well
we've got some options you can set up
down here to pop up to say let's say
let's look at a flat listing of all the
classes so now we see this all
alphabetical but wow that's still kind
of overwhelming why don't you just show
me my project classes for now and I see
a list of just the projects in my class
so we can select one of those
it's a SKT image and we can flip back to
the hierarchy here now and it shows us
Wow okay that's a subclass of SKT
graphic and you can look back through
the class hierarchy so if we were to
take a look at belief 19 the inherited
members inherited members yes so if we
look at the options there's a lot of
power in this options panel there's an
there's how you would set up the
different option sets for the pop up you
can configure that we'll have some
default sets there's a show inherited
members checkbox here so if we check
that now we can see that in gray we're
seeing all the members that we're
hearing from the frameworks classes so
but what are these book icons next to
some of these let's let's take a look at
one of those Mike so we click on the
book for the class method of boom the
HTML documentation for nsobject shows up
right here composite form
so we can also because we had previously
showed that files can be opened in
separate windows let's take a look at
Ennis busy a path off in a separate
window how would we do that
let's just go down double click on the
book icon for set default line join
style and off into a separate window the
HTML comes up so you can copy and paste
out of this multi window we're really
working to integrate the seamlessly and
well into project builder so it's not
ready to ship yet but we think you'll
like it when it gets fully there okay
thanks Mike so what else is on the
drawing board well one of the things
we've heard loud and clear is that some
of you would like more flexible UI so
for example we showed the tools pains
coming down in the project window it
might be nice to be able to have those
outside of the window and then general
have a more flexible multi window UI yes
we've heard that and yes we'll be
working on that other things plug-in
editors and plug-in build tools we've
been migrating the project towards that
capability already so the documentation
viewing that you just saw is actually
implemented as an editor plugin this is
letting us get the api's to a state
we're in a bit we'll be able to bring on
I make those API is more public we're
looking for tighter integration with
other tools such as interface builder
and the performance tools so the ability
to directly launch malloc debug or
sampler or object Alec on your
application from within project builder
and then on the compiler side of things
we need to do a lot of work on faster
C++ compilation and we are also working
on code generation improvements as well
so in summary project builder is a very
powerful IDE for Mac OS 10 we're working
hard to improve it in a lot of ways now
we've got a great team working on this
and we're
continuing to build up that team send us
your feedback many of you already have
been and most important finish up and
ship your applications so with that that
finishes up what I had to say there's a
variety of information pages out here
I'd like to bring godfrey back on the
stage for what remaining Q&A time we
have thank you very much Dave I think we
need a big hand for Dave and the project
building team I think the advancements
we're making the project builder are
more than just impressive and that it's
going to be a tremendous tool for all of
your use this is just a road map to all
all the farthest tools related sessions
through the show we felt that in this
session it was useful to give this to
you again so you have an idea where
we're going the next session in this
Hall is interface builder and we'll be
doing a similar similar presentation and
now let's kind of walk through these
that's my information in case you need
to contact us the Mac OS tools feedback
mailing address sends information to all
of the veldt the development team on a
one by one basis feature request feature
enhancements remember also to file bugs
when you run into bugs use the use the
bug report it's it's fully accessible
for this project
you